# Exoplanet Detection System Using Python and Machine Learning
Exoplanets, planets orbiting stars beyond our solar system, have been in the astrophysical limelight because they could host life. The problem of detecting exoplanets manually is challenging due to the intrinsic class imbalance nature of the dataset and the complexity involved in identifying subtle pat-terns within light curves. This paper presents a comprehensive approach to exoplanet detection utiliz-ing both classical machine learning and deep learning techniques. Initially, this project focused on classical machine learning methods, such as logistic regression, decision trees, XGBoost, SVM. These models were selected for their proven ability to handle structured data efficiently. However, as the complexity and dimensionality of the dataset became apparent, the project scope was expanded to include deep learning techniques. Specifically, a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) neural network based approaches are proposed to detect exoplanets. First, the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique balanced the dataset because of low representation of exoplanet instances. Principal component analy-sis was used subsequently to reduce the dimensionality to important features in the dataset. Model evaluation ensued, and decision trees achieved 95% accuracy on the training data, while the MLP neu-ral network gave a very competitive accuracy of 98.04%. These results demonstrate that classical ma-chine learning models and deep learning neural network models can be combined to obtain a powerful system for the detection of exoplanets.
